Developing buildout itself
**************************

When you're developing buildout itself, you need to know two things:

- Use a clean python *without* setuptools installed.  Otherwise many tests
  will find your already-installed setuptools, leading to test differences
  when setuptools' presence is explicitly tested.

- Also the presence of ``~/.buildout/default.cfg`` may interfere with the
  tests so you may want to temporarily rename it so that it does not get in
  the way.

- Don't bootstrap with ``python bootstrap/bootstrap.py`` but with ``python
  dev.py``.

- Run buildout with -U, to ignore user (default) settings which can interfere
  with using the development version

For your convenience we provide a Makefile to build various Python versions
in subdirectories of the buildout checkout. To use these and run the tests
with them do::

    make PYTHON_VER=2.7 build
    make PYTHON_VER=2.7 test

    make PYTHON_VER=3.4 build
    make PYTHON_VER=3.4 test

The actual Python compilation is only done once and then re-used. So on
subsequent builds, only the development buildout itself needs to be redone.


Releases: zc.buildout, zc.recipe.egg and bootstrap.py
-----------------------------------------------------

Buildout consists of two python packages that are released separately:
zc.buildout and zc.recipe.egg. zc.recipe.egg is changed much less often than
zc.buildout.

zc.buildout's setup.py and changelog is in the same directory as this
``DEVELOPERS.txt`` and the code is in ``src/zc/buildout``.

zc.recipe.egg, including setup.py and a separate changelog, is in the
``zc.recipe.egg_`` subdirectory.

A third item is the bootstrap.py file in ``bootstrap/bootstrap.py``. The
canonical location is at https://bootstrap.pypa.io/bootstrap-buildout.py,
(though it is unfortunate that it isn't named just ``bootstrap.py``). This
file is pulled automatically every 15 minutes from the bootstrap-release
branch. When a new buildout release is made, **the releaser** should update
the bootstrap-release branch, too.

The http://downloads.buildout.org/2/bootstrap.py location doesn't need to be
updated manually: it is a redirect now, to
https://bootstrap.pypa.io/bootstrap-buildout.py .

If there are changes to bootstrap.py, be sure to update the date in the
``__version__`` attribute and to record the bootstrap change (including the
new date/version) in zc.buildout's changelog.

When releasing, make sure you also build a (universal) wheel in addition to
the regular .tar.gz::

    $ python setup.py sdist bdist_wheel upload

You can also use zest.releaser to release it. If you've installed it as
``zest.releaser[recommended]`` it builds the wheel for you and uploads it via
https (via twine).
