System Python, Virtualenv and Buildout
--------------------------------------

This document explains why installing Python packages (eggs) in your
system-level Python is not recommended during the software development
lifecycle. It will also provide an overview of the benefits and drawbacks of
virtualenv and Buildout. Virtualenv [#]_ and Buildout are two approaches for
isolating and reproducing a python environment in a repeatable fashion. The
aim of this document is to reduce the evaluation time required to understand
the differences of these technologies.

"easy_install" [#]_ provides a mechanism to install a Python package (a.k.a.
"egg") into a Python environment. By using easy_install with your system-level
Python the package will be available system wide. Both virtualenv and Buildout
provide facilities to isolate a Python package (egg) installation so packages
are not available system wide.

Here are some reasons for isolate egg installation:

  * You may not have write access to the main Python environment

  * You want to experiment with a egg but not pollute your main Python
    environment

  * There is no easy way to differentiate eggs which have been installed in
    the Python environment by yourself or by system-level package installers
    (à la Red Hat).

  * While developing in Python you may depend on a system-level Python
    package. Someone consuming your software may not have the required system
    library or worse may have an incompatible version of this required
    library. Isolation ensures you can capture all requirements for your
    package.

Package/egg isolation are design goals of both virtualenv and Buildout.
Buildout's design allows for isolation but, unlike virtualenv isolation, is
not buildout's primary goal. Let's install both environments and look at how
they work.

You will need curl and version 2.4 of Python or later. Do not install Python
3.0 or higher at this point. You should download binary versions:

  * curl with SSL can be downloaded from http://curl.haxx.se/download.html

  * Python can be downloaded from http://python.org/download/

Let's create a sandbox with virtualenv and install 2 eggs, nose and mock.

On Linux::

  ~$ curl --insecure -O https://raw.github.com/pypa/virtualenv/master/virtualenv.py
  ~$ python virtualenv.py myvirtualenv
  ~$ cd myvirtualenv
  ~/myvirtualenv$ bin/pip install nose mock

On Windows::

  C:\Users\runyaga> curl --insecure -O https://raw.github.com/pypa/virtualenv/master/virtualenv.py
  C:\Users\runyaga> C:\Python27\python virtualenv.py --no-site-packages myvirtualenv
  C:\Users\runyaga> cd myvirtualenv
  C:\Users\runyaga\myvirtualenv> bin\pip install nose mock

You now have a sandboxed Python environment in the directory "myvirtualenv".
Installing new eggs in virtualenv is accomplished by running
myvirtualenv/bin/pip. The myvirtualenv/bin/python is a copy of the Python
interpreter you used to execute virtualenv.py script. You can see nose and
mock packages inside of myvirtualenv/Lib/python/site-packages directory.

Now, install buildout.

On Linux::

  ~$ mkdir mybuildout
  ~$ cd mybuildout
  ~/mybuildout$ curl -O http://svn.zope.org/*checkout*/zc.buildout/trunk/bootstrap/bootstrap.py
  ~/mybuildout$ python -S bootstrap.py -d init nose mock ./src

On Windows::

  C:\Users\runyaga> mkdir mybuildout
  C:\Users\runyaga> cd mybuildout
  C:\Users\runyaga\mybuildout> curl -O http://svn.zope.org/*checkout*/zc.buildout/trunk/bootstrap/bootstrap.py
  C:\Users\runyaga\mybuildout> C:\Python27\python bootstrap.py -S init nose mock ./src

You now have a Buildout configuration file, buildout.cfg and an associated
structure in your directory "mybuildout" which was generated by
mybuildout/bin/buildout. The above bootstrap.py usage is a shortcut to
generate a config file (buildout.cfg) which bin/buildout uses to assembly the
environment. The normal process is edit .cfg file and re-run buildout which
re-generates the sandbox.

If you look at the buildout.cfg you will see::

  [buildout]
  parts = py

  [py]
  recipe = zc.recipe.egg
  eggs = nose
         mock
  interpreter = python
  extra-paths = ./src

Another tutorial will describe the buildout configuration file and how the
recipe eco-system will make your life easier.

Now that you have virtualenv and buildout installed you can start your
experimentation.

Let's conclude this overview with a technical comparison between the two
sandbox approaches:

virtualenv clones your Python interpreter binary into a new directory and
creates a Python library directory structure. Installing packages and working
with python is identical to working with the system-level Python. Pip is used
to install/remove packages from your virtualenv. Pip also has a feature which
will generate a .txt file which can be used to re-create a isolated
environment with those eggs installed.

Buildout does not clone your intrepreter. Buildout creates a directory
structure and scripts (.cfg driven) which may be used for a wider set of tasks
[#]_ such as compiling C extensions[#]_ (e.g. configure; make; make install).
You do not install eggs into buildout directly. You edit a .cfg file and
re-run buildout which will add the packages to script paths (e.g.
mybuildout/bin/nosetests). At any point you can regenerate your sandbox with
the .cfg file. mybuildout/bin/python script puts eggs into sys.path
explicitly; edit the mybuildout/bin/python (on Linux) or
mybuildout/bin/python-script.py (on Windows).

In conclusion if you want to isolate your Python environment you can use
either virtualenv or Buildout. If you work with a mix of C (development
libraries) and Python you will want to use Buildout. Once you invest the time
into understanding buildout you can pick and choose from the 300+ recipes in
PyPI. Nowadays it is very unlikely you will need to create a recipe from
scratch.

.. [#] What virtualenv Does. http://www.virtualenv.org/en/latest/index.html#what-it-does
.. [#] Distribute is a setuptools fork.  http://packages.python.org/distribute/setuptools.html
.. [#] Buildout recipes at PYthon Package Index (Pypi) http://bit.ly/buildout_recipes
.. [#] zc.recipe.cmmi handles configure, make, make install for C extensions
   http://pypi.python.org/pypi/zc.recipe.cmmi

